ADR MLIR/LLVM (#32)
FullStaQD/compiler: docs/adr/0001-compiler-framework.md

Reviewer: I would rename it to `0001-compiler-infrastructure.md`. MLIR and LLVM always emphasise this term and I have to say I like it. "Infra" sounds broader than "framework".

Author: Done.

---
status: "accepted"
date: 2026-04-14
decision-makers:
  - "Enrique Naranjo Bejarano"
  - "Julian Farnsteiner"
  - "Reinhard Stahn"

>   - "Lukas Burgholzer"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - "Lukas Burgholzer"
  - "Yannick Stade"
```
Adding Yannick here from the TUM side.

---

# Compiler Framework

## Context and Problem Statement

As quantum computing systems become more complex and approach production use, there is a need for an industry-grade compiler framework capable of meeting the highly demanding requirements of quantum program execution and control. Our goal is to build a quantum compiler framework by leveraging an established classical compiler infrastructure.

The framework should be open source to enable collaboration from the broader quantum software community and facilitate integration by hardware manufacturers into their compilation pipelines. It must also support integration into high-performance computing (HPC) environments, which are expected to be early execution platforms for hybrid quantum-classical workflows.

> The architecture must be extensible across both front end and back end layers and support the requirements of fault-tolerant quantum computing systems, including low-latency control flow execution.

Reviewer 3: I dislike the spelling of "front end and back end layers" with so many words here, I think it's hard to read. [This discussion](https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/34447/is-it-front-end-frontend-or-front-end) shows no clear preference, but they point to 

> [GCC Coding Convention](http://gcc.gnu.org/codingconventions.html#Spelling):
    - "front end" (noun)
    - "front-end" (adjective)

I think this could be a good compromise. But maybe it's just my German soul speaking here. 

```suggestion
The architecture must be extensible across both front-end and back-end layers, and support the requirements of fault-tolerant quantum computing systems, including low-latency control flow execution.
```

Author: As discussed, for we will go for frontend as we refer to a noun and front-end when we refer to an adjective. Also, we are programmers and not grammarians so we are not going to obsess over this rule and go for fronted when there is any doubt.

> On the front end, the framework must represent high-level quantum programming abstractions and progressively lower them through multiple levels of intermediate representations to machine-level code executed by quantum control hardware. It should support quantum programs with classical control flow, mid-circuit measurement, and dynamic circuit adaptation. It must also support kernel-based compilation workflows targeting heterogeneous classical accelerators (CPU, GPU, FPGA, etc.) used in hybrid execution stacks.

Reviewer 3: FPGA falls in a bit of a different meta-category from CPU and GPU, I believe. But it also feels wrong to leave it unmentioned

Author: Yeah, I agree with your view. I will go for custom accelerator implemented in a FPGA.

## Considered Options

- Develop a custom end-to-end compiler framework.
- Use LLVM as back end and MLIR as the primary intermediate representation / front end infrastructure.
- Use LLVM as back end with a custom-designed front end IR.

## Decision Outcome and Justification

We select LLVM as the back end compiler infrastructure and MLIR as the primary intermediate representation framework for the front end and mid-level compilation layers.

> LLVM is a widely adopted, mature open-source compiler infrastructure that provides robust code generation capabilities across a broad range of target architectures, including those used in heterogeneous and HPC environments. It is actively maintained and broadly used in industry and research contexts. While LLVM provides strong back end capabilities, it imposes constraints in terms of IR flexibility and requires careful version management due to limited long-term ABI stability guarantees across releases. These constraints are manageable but require explicit dependency control and integration discipline.

Reviewer 2: On the ABI stability: This really only applies to MLIR and not LLVM itself. LLVM itself follows a stable versioning policy and has much stronger guarantees than MLIR.
However, this subtle difference is not too important for the ADR; so feel free to resolve this after reading it.

Author: I will change it to MLIR.

> LLVM is a widely adopted, mature open-source compiler infrastructure that provides robust code generation capabilities across a broad range of target architectures, including those used in heterogeneous and HPC environments. It is actively maintained and broadly used in industry and research contexts. While LLVM provides strong back end capabilities, it imposes constraints in terms of IR flexibility and requires careful version management due to limited long-term ABI stability guarantees across releases. These constraints are manageable but require explicit dependency control and integration discipline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LLVM is a widely adopted, mature open-source compiler infrastructure that provides robust code generation capabilities across a broad range of target architectures, including those used in heterogeneous and HPC environments. It is actively maintained and broadly used in industry and research contexts. While LLVM provides strong backend capabilities, it imposes constraints in terms of IR flexibility and requires careful version management due to limited long-term ABI stability guarantees across releases. These constraints are manageable but require explicit dependency control and integration discipline.
```

Reviewer 3: Ah, I see you stumbled across the same spelling, see my other comment. We should make a concious decision

Reviewer: I wasn't even aware that there are different spellings. I just thought it was a typo :D .

Author: Already commented on a previous comment. I resolve this comment.

> Alternative compiler back ends such as GCC were considered but are less suitable for modular compiler construction due to their more monolithic architecture and comparatively limited support for custom IR pipelines and extensibility in modern compiler research contexts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternative compiler back ends such as GCC were considered but found to be less suitable for modular compiler construction due to their more monolithic architecture and comparatively limited support for custom IR pipelines and extensibility.
```
I think a little less is more here. We could also strike the whole sentence.

> MLIR is selected as the primary front end and mid-level IR infrastructure. It provides a flexible multi-level intermediate representation framework designed to support domain-specific IR dialects and progressive lowering. This makes it particularly well suited for representing quantum-specific abstractions while integrating with LLVM-based back end pipelines.

Reviewer 3: >  a flexible multi-level intermediate representation framework

I am a bit uncomfortable with the name of the framework being used as its genuine description, even though it is a descriptive name. It's a bit awkward to call MLIR "an MLIR framework"

> IR dialects

This technical term has not been introduced and is specific to MLIR.

```suggestion
MLIR ("multi-level intermediate representation") is selected as the primary front end and mid-level IR infrastructure. It provides a flexible framework designed to support domain-specific IR language fragments ("dialects") and progressive lowering. This makes it particularly well suited for representing quantum-specific abstractions while integrating with LLVM-based back end pipelines.
```

Reviewer 3: In addition, we could cite some papers, outlining the history of MLIR adoption in the quantum compilation community.

Reviewer: I do not know if we really should do this. I would only cite something if it proves a particular point. For me usually the QIRO paper and this ORNL paper come to my mind, when it comes to the question "is MLIR suitable for MLIR". But this question is a bit to general for my taste to justify a citation.

> MLIR enables the definition of custom dialects that can encode quantum operations, control flow, and hardware-specific constraints, and supports structured transformation and optimization passes across abstraction levels. This is particularly relevant for quantum compilation, where multiple representation layers are required between high-level circuit descriptions and low-level control instructions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MLIR enables the definition of custom dialects that can encode quantum operations, control flow, and hardware-specific constraints, and supports structured transformation and optimization passes across abstraction levels. This is particularly relevant for quantum compilation, where multiple representation layers are required between high-level quantum programs, mid-level circuit descriptions, and low-level control instructions.
```

Pitching my personal ideology, might be controversial

> A key design consideration is that certain quantum-specific semantics (e.g., linear resource constraints, uncomputation, and reversibility requirements) are not natively represented as first-class constructs in MLIR and must instead be enforced through dialect design and compiler transformations. While this introduces implementation complexity, it is considered acceptable given the maturity of the ecosystem and its extensibility.

Reviewer: I am not super happy about this paragraph. It sounds like a particular disadvantage of MLIR although it could actually serve as a big plus of MLIR if phrased differently. Do you know what I mean? If not I try to clarify next time.

Reviewer 3: I also have mixed feelings here. Not sure which point we want to make. I have too little experience atm to tell if MLIR is better or worse than average with these issues. 

> linear resource constraints

I am aware of the resource interpretation of linear logic, but mentioning it here is a bit confusing I'd say.

Reviewer: > > linear resource constraints

> I am aware of the resource interpretation of linear logic, but mentioning it here is a bit confusing I'd say.

nah, lets just boast a little bit ;) . I think it is totally fine here. People in the wild really argue with this point.

Author: I added this comment to have something negative and it is something that we have already commented before between us, specifically in the context of discussing Huggr.

> A fully custom front end IR was considered in order to natively encode quantum semantics at the language level. However, this approach would significantly increase long-term maintenance cost and reduce interoperability with existing compiler tooling ecosystems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We considered a fully custom frontend, a path taken by projects like [HUGR](https://github.com/Quantinuum/hugr). While HUGR provides a specialized graph-based IR for quantum computing, we declined this route for three reasons:

- Maintenance Overhead: A custom implementation like HUGR effectively recreates MLIR's core functionality (e.g., pass managers, verifiers) without the benefit of the global LLVM contributor base.
- Ecosystem Fragmentation: A custom IR limits direct interoperability with the vast library of existing classical LLVM/MLIR tooling, increasing the "integration tax" for hybrid applications.
- Resource Allocation: We prioritize developing quantum-specific optimizations over maintaining foundational IR infrastructure.
```

Reviewer 3: Good to mention this, only on style: Passive voice is used throughout the ADR. This should also be a concious decision.

Reviewer: Yeah actually now that you point it out: I really am in favor of not using passive voice. I mean why should we use an awkward language. IMO we should speak like normal humans. When I write "_We_ considered" I really mean it. Not "somebody"! Open for discussion but I have a strong opinion here.

## Consequences

- Positive: LLVM and MLIR provide a mature, actively maintained, and widely adopted compiler infrastructure suitable for HPC and heterogeneous execution environments.
- Positive: MLIR enables modular design with domain-specific dialects, which is well aligned with quantum compilation requirements.
- Positive: Leveraging LLVM/MLIR reduces the need to develop and maintain a full compiler back end stack.

> - Negative: LLVM versioning and upgrade coordination introduces integration overhead due to limited backward compatibility guarantees.

Reviewer 3: Let's at least have an empty line for separation here

Author: Changed.

- Negative: Extending LLVM back ends or integrating tightly with low-level code generation pipelines can be complex.

> - Negative: Quantum-specific semantics must be explicitly encoded and enforced through MLIR dialect design and transformation logic rather than being inherently supported by the framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positive:
- LLVM and MLIR provide a mature, actively maintained, and widely adopted compiler infrastructure suitable for HPC and heterogeneous execution environments.
- MLIR enables modular design with domain-specific dialects, which is well aligned with quantum compilation requirements.
- Leveraging LLVM/MLIR reduces the need to develop and maintain a full compiler backend stack.

Negative:
- LLVM versioning and upgrade coordination introduces integration overhead due to limited API and ABI stability.
- Extending LLVM backends or integrating tightly with low-level code generation pipelines can be complex and requires a skilled work-force.
- Quantum-specific semantics must be explicitly encoded and enforced through MLIR dialect design and transformation logic rather than being inherently supported by the underlying infrastructure.
```

Reviewer 3: additional possible negatives:
 - LLVM is huge, so even if it's the sole dependency, the compiler will be a large program.
 - Compiler performance is upper-bounded by LLVM (it's fast, but if you do it right, dedicated backends are a lot faster. Same likely holds for MLIR).
 - Somewhat deprecating technology: C++ (I hope), LLVM. I view this as (mild) technical debt that MLIR inherited.

Reviewer: > Compiler performance is upper-bounded by ... MLIR

Here is a nice reference on this: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/discussions/1913 .

> Somewhat deprecating technology: C++ (I hope), LLVM. 

But then on the pro side would should count C++ as an established HPC language. Alot of people acknowledge the tech depth of C++ but its widespread use lead to serious efforts to not let C++ devs alone: Carbonlang and mojo explictly target C++ users (but not rust users). I believe rust is not the end of the story.

Author: I see that LLVM is here to stay for a long time. I don't think that neither C++ or LLVM are deprecating technology but mature ones.
